# Internet:
- collection of computers and other peripherals.

- **www**: 
    - colloeciton of sw and corresponding protoclos that are used to access a resource over a network.

## switch:
- device used for computers to communicate in same env.
- interact with switch?
    - cabels: cat-5 or cat-6 and fiber optics
    - not wireless
- for wireless communcation we can use an *access point device*.
- connected computers made a LAN (local are network).
- packets are transfered to communicate.
- many ports are available on switch. (variable number of ports).

## router:
- main task of router is to enable computers to connect to the internet.
- via switch.
- special cable comes to our house and we connect to the internet by using this cable.
- this cable is given to us by the ISP (internet service provider).
- if a comptuer can send packets to the internet, this means that this computer can connect to the internet without any problem.
- and router delivers the packets from the LAN to the internet.
- or you can say that router helps computer in one LAN communicate with computers on other LAN.
- each router must have a special table called 'Routing Table'.
- this table tells us which route the packet shoud choose.

## home-router
- combo device that is mixture of router and switch
- most home routers also have an access point feature.(wireless tech)

## what does internet represent?
- many routers on internet.
- connecting to internet can stand for connection to another computer in anywhere in the world.
- strutcture that connects lans all over the world.
- router is used to learn the packet's destination then it looks at the table and learns over which port the packet will be sent.
    - routers have special processors inside. These processors create routing tables by using special algos.
    - when routers create their routing tabels, they are not only concerned with the number of points in order to choose the shorets route.
    - traffic is also considered.(congestion control).
- *"internet is the network of networks"*
- structure that includes all the lans in the world.

### connection to the internet
- need a router for a single computer.
- streaming: sending large file piece by piece.
- packet transmission is the basis of connecting to the internet.
- bw servers and home pc(clients).

### vpn
- virtual private network
- the tunneling feature of teh vpn provides us privacy, anonymity, and security on the internet.
- many people use it to access restricted websites.
- ensures anonymity, and encrypts messages.
- basically creates a special network over the public network.

### security
- end to end encryption bw end points is used to secure the info. in the packets.
 
### ISP
- responsible for transmission of packets from one network to another
- each ISP is responsible for specific routers.
- isps represent companies that enable us to connect to the internet for money.
- local isps:
    - resp. for connection of some lans
    - connects neighborhoods.
- regional isps:
    - connects cities in a country.

- regional isp + local isp = network of country.
- global isps:
    - connects regional and local isps.
    - network that global isps make with each other is also called internet backbone.
    - Internet exchange point is the structure that enables the internet backbone to work synchronously.









































