# UNIT 4

## overview
### AJAX Introduction:
    - Creating Simple Ajax Application, 
    - Create an XMLHttpRequest Object,
    - Interacting with the Web Server Using XMLHttpRequest Object,
    - Difference between Ajax and Non-Ajax Applications.

### Working with PHP and AJAX: 
    - Process Clients Requests, 
    - Accessing Files Using PHP,
    - Implementing Security and Accessibility in AJAX
    - Application:
        - Introduction, 
        - Secure AJAX Applications.

---


## AJAX:
- Asynchronous JavaScript and XML (Ajax) refer to a group of technologies that are used to develop web applications. 
- By combining these technologies, web pages appear more responsive since small packets of data are exchanged with the server and web pages are not reloaded each time that a user makes an input change.
- Ajax enables a web application user to interact with a web page without the interruption of constant web page reloading.
- Website interaction happens quickly with only portions of the page reloading and refreshing.
- Ajax is made up of the following technologies:
    - XHTML and CSS for presenting information.
    - Document Object Model (DOM) for dynamically interacting with and displaying the presented information.
    - XMLHttpRequest object to manipulate data asynchronously with the web server.
    - XML, HTML, and XSLT for data interchange and manipulation.
    - JavaScript for binding data requests and information display.

- Ajax incorporates these technologies to create a new approach to developing web applications.
- Ajax defines a method of initiating client to server communication without page reloads. 
- It provides a way to enable partial page updates. From a web page user perspective, it means improved interaction with a web application, which gives the user more control of their environment, similar to that of a desktop application.
- In a traditional web application, HTTP requests, that are initiated by the user's interaction with the web interface, are made to a web server. 
- The web server processes the request and returns an HTML page to the client. 
- During HTTP transport, the user is unable to interact with the web application.

- In an Ajax web application, the user is not interrupted in interactions with the web application. 
- The Ajax engine or JavaScript interpreter enables the user to interact with the web application independent of HTTP transport to and from the server by rendering the interface and handling communications with the server on the user's behalf.

### Ajax limitations
- While Ajax is a web application development technique that is designed to make web pages more responsive and interactive with a user. 
- Ajax has some limitations to consider before you develop an Ajax-based application. 
- The following limitations are some of the more prominent disadvantages:
1. Browser support - 
    - Not all browsers support JavaScript or XMLHttpRequest object. 
    - Even among browsers that do have support for JavaScript and XMLHttpRequest, these objects can be treated differently. 
    - Each browser's implementation of Ajax must be considered.
2. Security and user privacy - 
    - Not all concerns are addressed. 
    - Issues surrounding security and user privacy need to be considered when developing an Ajax application.
3. Accessibility 
    - Because not all browsers have JavaScript or XMLHttpRequest object support, you must ensure that you provide a way to make the web application accessible to all users.
4. Bookmark and navigation 
    - Since Ajax is used to asynchronously load bits of content into an existing page, some of the page information may not correspond to a newly loaded page. 
    - Browser history and bookmarks may not have the correct behavior since the URL was unchanged despite parts of the page being changed.
5. Search engine 
    - Ajax applications are not searchable; 
    - however, it is possible to use Ajax features and elements within an application that is searchable.

--- 

## CREATING SIMPLE AJAX APPLICATION:
- Ajax web applications use JavaScript to interact with a server and update web pages without reloading them. 
- The following eight steps show how to develop a simple Ajax web application.
1. Create or find your data source URL 
    - An Ajax web application needs a server or other source of data that can be accessed using a URL in order to update the page. 
2. Create the HTML for your application 
    - eg: 
        ```html
        <html>
        <head>
        <title>An Ajax Web Application</title>
        </head>
        <body>
        <h1 id="page-title"></h1>
        <button id="load-data">Click Here to Load the Data</button>
        </body>
        </html>
        ```
3. Create a script block in your HTML (just above the closing body tag) and
write an event listener to detect click events on the button.
    - eg:
        ```html
        <script>
        document.getElementById("load-
                data").addEventListener("click",function(){
                });
        </script>
        ```
4. Use an XMLHttpRequest object inside the event listener's callback function to request the data file.
    - eg:
        ```js
        var xmlhttp = new XMLHttpRequest();
        xmlhttp.open("GET", "data.txt");
        ```
5. To detect the response, look for a change in the state of the xmlhttp response, using the onreadystatechange event handler.
    - eg:
        ```js
        xmlhttp.onreadystatechange = function() {
            //Do something here
        }
        ```
6. Write a callback function to insert the data from the text file into the h1 element when the state of the response changes.
    - eg:
        ```js
        xmlhttp.onreadystatechange = function() {
            document.getElementById("page-title").innerHTML = this.responseText;
        }
        ```
7. Use the send() method to send the request.
    - eg:
        ```js
        xmlhttp.send();
        ```
- The finished HTML page should look like this:
    ```html
    <html>
    <head>
    <title>An Ajax Web Application</title>

    </head>
    <body>
    <h1 id="page-title"></h1>
    <button id="load-data">Click Here to Load the Data</button>
    <script>
    document.getElementById("load-data").addEventListener("click",function(){
            var xmlhttp = new XMLHttpRequest();
            xmlhttp.open("GET", "data.txt");
            xmlhttp.onreadystatechange = function() {
                document.getElementById("page-title").innerHTML = this.responseText;
            };
            xmlhttp.send();
        });
    </script>
    </body>
    </html>
    ```

---

## Create an XMLHttpRequest Object
- XMLHttpRequest is an object that is used to send a request to the webserver for exchanging data or transferring and manipulating to it and from the server behind the scenes. 
- You can use the received data to update the data present on the web page without even reloading the page.
- Syntax:
    - At first, you have to invoke the XMLHttpRequest() method as shown below.
        ```js
        var variable_name = new XMLHttpRequest();
        ```
    - After calling the XMLHttpRequest() method you have to define a callback function that will trigger after getting the response. 
        ```js
        variable_name.onload = function () {
            // Content of callback function
            // after getting the response
        }
        ```
    - Sending a request using the open() and send() methods as shown below.
        ```js
        variable_name.open("GET", "textFile.txt");
        variable_name.send();
        ```
- The XMLHttpRequest object has different functions and properties that are listed below.

### XMLHttpRequest object methods:
- new XMLHttpRequest(): 
    - It creates a new XMLHttpRequest object.
- abort(): 
    - This method will cancel the current request to exchange data.
- getAllResponseHeaders(): 
    - It will return a set of HTTP headers in form of a string.
- getResponseHeader(): It will return the specified HTTP header information.
- open(method, URL, async, userName, password): 
    - This method specifies the method, URL, and other parameters of a request. 
    - In this function call, the method parameter defines the operation that has to be performed on the data like GET, POST, HEAD, and some other HTTP methods such as PUT, DELETE. 
    - The async parameter specifies the asynchronous behavior of the request. 
        - It holds two values true and false.
        - If the value is true then the script processing will continue after send() method without waiting for the response while false value means that the script will wait for a response before processing it.
- send(): 
    - It will send the request to the server for data exchange. 
    - To GET the requests, send() is used.
- send(string): 
    - It also sends the request to the server for data exchange, but It is used to POST the requests.
- setRequestHeader(): 
    - It will add the label and value pair to the header that has to be sent.
- Example: Below example illustrates the use of XMLHttpRequest() object
methods.
    ```html
    <!DOCTYPE html>
    <html>
    <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <meta http-equiv="X-UA-Compatible" content="IE=edge">
    <meta name="viewport" content= "width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
    <title>Ready states of a request in ajax</title>
    <style>
        #container {
            display: flex;
            flex-direction: column;
            justify-content: center;
            align-items: center;
        }
    </style>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div id="container">
            <h1>Hey Geek,</h1>
            <h3>Welcome to GeeksforGeek!</h3>
            <button type="button" onclick="stateChange()">
                Update Text
            </button>
        </div>
        <script>
            function stateChange() {
                var state = new XMLHttpRequest();
                state.onload = function () {
                    document.getElementById("container").innerHTML = state.getAllResponseHeaders();
                }
                state.open("GET", "gfgInfo.txt", true);
                state.send();
            }
        </script>
    </body>
</html>
    ```

### XMLHttpRequest object properties:
- onload: 
    - It defines a callback function that will be called when the request is loaded or received.
- onreadystatechange: 
    - It also defines a callback function that will be invoked when the readyState property changes.
- readyState: 
    - The readyState property defines the current state of the request or holds the current status of the XMLHttpRequest. 
    - There are five states of a request that are listed below.
        - readyState=0: It states that the request is not initialized yet.
        - readyState=1: In this state, the server connection is established and the request is settled up.
        - readyState=2: This state states that the request is received by the server.
        - readyState=3: This request is in a processing state at this level.
        - readyState=4: The request is finished or completed at this stage and the response is ready for further use.
- responseText: 
    - It will return the data received by the request in the form of a string.
- responseXML: 
    - It will return the data received by the request in the form of XML data.
- status:
    - It will return the status number of the request. (i.e. 200 and 404 for OK and NOT FOUND respectively)
- statusText:
    - It will return the status text in form of a string. (i.e. OK and NOT FOUND for 200 and 404 respectively)

---

## Interacting with the Web Server Using XMLHttpRequest Object

---

## Difference between Ajax and Non-Ajax Applications

---



## Working with PHP and AJAX: 
- AJAX stands for Asynchronous JavaScript and XML. 
- AJAX is a new technique for creating better, faster, and more interactive web applications with the help of XML, HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
- Conventional web applications transmit information to and from the server using synchronous requests. 
    - It means you fill out a form, hit submit, and get directed to a new page with new information from the server.
- With AJAX, when submit is pressed, JavaScript will make a request to the server, interpret the results and update the current screen. 
- In the purest sense, the user would never know that anything was even transmitted to the server.
- The following example will demonstrate how a web page can communicate with a web server while a user types characters in an input field:
    ```html
    <html>
    <head>
    <script>
        function showHint(str) {
            if (str.length == 0) {
                document.getElementById("txtHint").innerHTML = "";
                return;
            } else {
                var xmlhttp = new XMLHttpRequest();
                xmlhttp.onreadystatechange = function() {
                    if (this.readyState == 4 && this.status == 200) {
                        document.getElementById("txtHint").innerHTML = this.responseText;
                    }
                };
                xmlhttp.open("GET", "gethint.php?q=" + str, true);
                xmlhttp.send();
            }
        }
    </script>
    </head>
    <body>
        <p><b>Start typing a name in the input field below:</b></p>
        <form action="">
            <label for="fname">First name:</label>
            <input type="text" id="fname" name="fname" onkeyup="showHint(this.value)">
        </form>
        <p>Suggestions: <span id="txtHint"></span></p>
    </body>
    </html>
    ```

- Code explanation:
    - First, check if the input field is empty (str.length == 0). 
        - If it is, clear the content of the txtHint placeholder and exit the function.
    - Do the following, if the input field is not empty:
        - Create an XMLHttpRequest object
        - Create the function to be executed when the server response is ready
        - Send the request off to a PHP file (gethint.php) on the server
    - Notice that the q parameter is added to the url (gethint.php?q="+str)
    - And the str variable holds the content of the input field
- The PHP File - "gethint.php."
    - The PHP file checks an array of names, and returns the corresponding name(s) to the browser.
    ```php
    <?php
    //  Array with names
    $a[] = "Anna";
    $a[] = "Brittany";
    $a[] = "Cinderella";
    $a[] = "Diana";
    // ... 
    $a[] = "Vicky";
    // fetch q parameter from URL
    $q = $_REQUEST["q"];
    $hint = "";
    // lookup all hints from array if $q is different from ""
    if ($q !== "") {
        $q = strtolower($q);
        $len=strlen($q);
        foreach($a as $name) {
            if (stristr($q, substr($name, 0, $len))) {
                if ($hint === "") {
                    $hint = $name;
                } else {
                    $hint .= ", $name";
                }
            }
        }
    }

    // It results in "no suggestion" if no hint was found or output correct values
    echo $hint === "" ? "no suggestion" : $hint;
    ?>
    ```

## Process Clients Requests
## Accessing Files Using PHP
## Implementing Security and Accessibility in AJA
### AJAX Security: Server Side
- AJAX-based Web applications use the same server-side security schemes of regular Web applications.
- You specify authentication, authorization, and data protection requirements in your web.xml file (declarative) or in your program (programmatic).
- AJAX-based Web applications are subject to the same security threats as regular Web applications.
### AJAX Security: Client Side
- JavaScript code is visible to a user/hacker. Hacker can use JavaScript code for inferring server-side weaknesses.
- JavaScript code is downloaded from the server and executed ("eval") at the client and can compromise the client by mal-intended code.
- Downloaded JavaScript code is constrained by the sand-box security model and can be relaxed for signed JavaScript.
- Asynchronous Javascript and XML (AJAX) is one of the latest techniques used to develope web application inorder to give a rich user experience. 
    - Since it is a new technology, there are many security issues that are yet to be completely established.
- below are the few security issues in AJAX.
    - The attack surface is more as there are more inputs to be secured.
    - It also exposes the internal functions of the applications.
    - Failure to protect authentication information and sessions.
    - There is a very narrow line between client-side and server-side, hence there are possibilities of committing security mistakes.

#### Preventive Mechanisms
- Client side:
    - Use .innerText instead of .innerHtml.
    - Do not use eval.
    - Do not rely on client logic for security.
    - Avoid writing serialization code.
    - Avoid building XML dynamically.
    - Never transmit secrets to the client.
    - Do not perform encryption in client side code.
    - Do not perform security impacting logic on client side.
- Server side:
    - Use CSRF protection.
    - Avoid writing serialization code.
    - Services can be called by users directly.
    - Avoid building XML by hand, use the framework.
    - Avoid building JSON by hand, use an existing framework.

---

## Application
## Introduction
## Secure AJAX Applications















